
--- Page 1 ---

MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
 4 HY Anatomy/MSK/Rheum  
- Student Q sh owed  electron micrograph (EM)  pic of sarcomere  + they asked what does not change 
length during  muscle contraction  + had letters at different locations . Answer  = A-band.  
 
o Before you instantly freak out, relax. First look  at above EM of sarcomere . Then compare 
with  bottom images here:  
 
o All you need to know is: as the myosin and actin overlap during muscle contraction, the H -
zone, I -band, and sarcomere (Z -Z) shorten. The A -band (myosin ; neon -green bar above ) does 
not change in length.  


--- Page 2 ---

MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
 5 o Tropomyosin is a protein on actin that covers up myosin binding sites. During contraction, 
calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum and binds to tropo nin, c ausing  a 
conformational change that  releases tropomyosin from  actin, thereby allowing my osin to 
bind.  
o ATP is required to relax  muscle (i.e., rigor mortis in the deceased  due to ¯ ATP). 
- 24M + partakes in research study of muscle contraction; Q asks, on the following electro n micrograph 
of a sarcomere, which segment will not change length? (choose the number):  
 
o Answer = #2 (A -band). In contrast, the I -band (#6), H -zone (#7), and length of sarcomere  (#1; 
Z-Z) all shorten during contraction.  
Muscle fiber type  Slow -twitch (type I) Fast-twitch  (type II)  
Predominance in whom  Long -distance runners  Powerlifters; sprinters  
Oxygen usage  Aerobic  Anaerobic  
Glycogen content  Low High  
Fatiguability  Slow to fatigue  Quick to fatigue  
Mitochondria  Many  Few 
Myoglobin content (red in color)  High (more red)  Low (more white)  
 
- 28M + femoral nerve injury resulting in denervation of rectus femoris; Q asks what is most likely to be 
seen during nerve recovery; answer = “fiber type grouping of type I and II muscle cells”; you need to 
know tha t reinnervation of muscle results in aberrant reorganization of type I and II muscle units.  This 
aberrant reorganization is called fiber type grouping. This is answer on an NBME.  


--- Page 3 ---

MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
MEHLMANMEDICAL.COM  
 6 - 24M + partakes in powerlifting routine; Q asks ­ or « for changes in muscle cell number, muscle cell 
size, and mitochondria; answer = « muscle cell number, ­ muscle cell size, and « mitochondria. 
Skeletal muscle response to activity is hypertrophy, not hyp erplasia. Powerlifting is anaerobic and 
does not increase mitochondria.  
- 20F + paraplegic following accident; Q asks what is most likely to be seen in this patient; answer = 
“polyubiquitination”; proteins are tagged with ubiquitin in order to be sent to the  proteasome for 
breakdown; atrophy in the setting of inactivity = ­ ubiquitination.  
- 31M + in wilderness for 3 weeks without food; Q asks what allows him to maintain normal serum 
glucose levels during this time; answer = “skeletal muscle protein” à you must  know that skeletal 
muscle does not contain glucose -6-phosphatase and therefore does not directly carry out 
gluconeogenesis; glucogenic amino acids can be liberated in the fasting state from skeletal muscle, 
with the liver carrying out the gluconeogenesis.  The kidney  can also carry out gluconeogenesis.  
- 16F + receives insulin injection + serum glucose lowers; Q asks why; answer = “increased glucose 
uptake by skeletal muscle”; both skeletal muscle and adipose tissue take up glucose via GLUT4 in 
response to in sulin.  
- Q on offline Step 1 NBME form asks why ATP does not fall appreciably during a series of muscle 
twitches à answer = “ATP is quickly regenerating from creatine phosphate.”  
- “What do I need to know about shoulder anatomy for USMLE?”  à USMLE is known to occasionally 
give images of shoulder, clavicular, and humeral fractures. Spending a few moments to gain an idea of  
normal  shoulder anatomy is not “nitpicky.”  
